Add page on distributing provenance (#673)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/v1.0/distributing-artifacts.md

A single "release" of a project, package, or library may include multiple
artifacts. These artifacts result from builds on different platforms,
architectures or environments. The builds need not happen at roughly the same
point in time and might even span multiple days.

The complete set of attestations for a given release is incomplete until all
builds for a given release are finished. However, it is difficult or impossible
to determine when a release is 'finished' because many ecosystems allow adding
new artifacts to old releases when adding support for new platforms or
architectures.

Thus, package ecosystems SHOULD support multiple individual attestations per
release. At the time of a given build, the relevant build attestations for that
build can be added to the release, depending on the relationship to the given
artifacts.

## Relationship between artifacts and attestations

Package ecosystems SHOULD support a one-to-many relationship between build
artifacts and attestations to ensure that anyone is free to produce and publish
any attestation they may need. Package ecosystems MUST require a strict
one-to-one relationship between the build artifact and the build provenance

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Author: This is meant to say that there is a one-to-one inverse relationship: an attestation should only have a relationship to a single artifact.

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Author: a6bdf5d

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Reviewer: Sorry, I still don't understand. What is the reasoning behind the requirement? What would happen if this requirement is violated?

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Author: The reasoning is to enforce the recommendation on attestation filenames and their relationship to artifacts. E.g., if we have `artifact_a.<extension>` and `artifact_b.<extension>`, an attestation named `artifact_a.attestation` shouldn't have any relationship to `artifact_b.<extension>` (especially given the fact that attestation formats like `.intoto.jsonl` might contain multiple attestations in a single file).

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Reviewer: But why is that a problem? Suppose you create a build that generates both `artifact_a` and `artifact_b` in the same build, with a single attestation listing both artifacts in the subject. You publish the same attestation as both `artifact_a.attestation` and `artifact_b.attestation`. That seems to violate your requirement here, but seems perfectly valid to me. Or am I misunderstanding?

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Author: I agree that would be fine, what wouldn't be ok is having to know something about `artifact_b` (like the filename) to get the attestation for `artifact_a`.

So maybe this should be rephrased as "ecosystems MUST have a one-to-one mapping between an artifact and an attestation such that the attestation can be discovered from the artifact alone" or something to that effect.

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Reviewer: But is this a real concern? Can we just drop this requirement? I'm having a hard time thinking of a situation where we drop this requirement, someone implements it anyway, it works, and yet that's a bad thing. Either it won't work, but it's likely fine?

> attestation for that artifact.  The mappings can be either implicit (e.g.

Reviewer: LGTM.

require a custom filename schema that uniquely identifies the build attestation
over other attestation types) or explicit (e.g. it may happen as a de-facto
standard based on where the attestation is published).

The build attestation SHOULD have a filename that is directly related to the
build artifact filename. For example, for an artifact `<filename>.<extension>`,
the attestation is `<filename>.attestation` (or some similar extension, for
example [in-toto](https://in-toto.io/) recommends `<filename>.intoto.jsonl`),
or for an artifact with a SHA-256 hash of `abc123...`, the attestation
incorporates that hash into the filename or metadata.

## Where attestations should be published

There are a number of opportunities and venues to publish attestations during
and after the build process. Producers SHOULD publish attestations in a number

> of places:

Author: I don't think there's an order of preference here, and these aren't mutually exclusive. I think there's always a benefit to publishing these in multiple places, e.g. once a package registry supports publishing, that doesn't mean one should stop publishing in source repository releases.

> Publishing to a transparency log is also a good idea. (Why?)

Added an answer to this in 21e8091.

-   **Publish attestations in a transparency log**: Once a build has been made,
    the resulting attestation (or a hash of the attestation and a pointer to
    where it is indexed) should be published to a third-party transparency log
    that exists outside the source repository and artifact repository.
-   **Publish attestations alongside source releases in the source
    repository**: For ecosystems where source releases are commonly published
    to source repositories as well as to artifact repositories (such as GitHub
    releases), producers SHOULD include provenance attestations as part of
    these releases if the source repository supports attaching additional
    artifacts to a release. This option requires no changes to the artifact
    repository to support build attestation formats, but means that the source
    repository in use is now in the dependency chain for installers that want
    to verify policy at build-time.

> -   **Publish attestations alongside the artifact in the artifact repository**:

Author: 9755259

    Many software repositories already support some variety of publishing 1:1
    related files alongside an artifact, sometimes known as “sidecar files”.
    For example, PyPI supports publishing `.asc` files representing the PGP
    signature for an artifact with the same filename (but different extension).
    This option requires the mapping between artifact and attestation (or
    attestation vessel) to be 1:1.

A combination of these options allows for a bootstrap process where projects
that want to generate build provenance attestations may begin publishing
attestations in a way that is directly tied to a source release or built
artifact without needing to wait for the upstream package repository to support
publishing attestations, by publishing it as part of the source repository
release.

Long-term, in order to maintain a single dependency on the artifact repository
already in use, repositories should gain support for both uploading and

> distributing the build attestation alongside the artifact.

Author: Hmm, the other aspect is trust -- consumers already trust one service, and don't need to extend trust into some other additional service.

I think I'd change "failure domain" to "point of failure" here as well, so as not to be confused with literal domain names, WDYT?

> distributing the build attestation alongside the artifact.

Author: b06879c

and after the build process. Producers SHOULD publish attestations in a number
of places:

-   **Publish attestations in a transparency log**: Once a build has been made,
    the resulting attestation (or a hash of the attestation and a pointer to
    where it is indexed) SHOULD be published to a third-party transparency log
    that exists outside the source repository and package registry. Not only
    are transparency logs are guaranteed to be immutable, but they also more
    easily enable monitoring.  Requiring the presence of the attestation in a
    monitored transparency log during verification helps ensure the attestation
    is trustworthy.
-   **Publish attestations alongside source releases in the source
    repository**: For ecosystems where source releases are commonly published
    to source repositories as well as to package registries (such as GitHub
    releases), producers SHOULD include provenance attestations as part of
    these releases if the source repository supports attaching additional
    artifacts to a release. This option requires no changes to the artifact
    repository to support build attestation formats, but means that the source

>     repository in use is now in the dependency chain for installers that want

Reviewer: nit: "dependency chain" might be confused with build-time "dependencies" that we talk about elsewhere in SLSA. Maybe "critical path"?

Author: c1e5e56

    to verify policy at build-time.

> -   **Publish attestations alongside the artifact in the package registry**:

Reviewer 2: So is this a SHOULD or MAY or something else? Not clear right now. Are all three possibilities kept to a SHOULD right now, so that it is acceptable not to publish any build provenance attestations at all?

Author: The line that introduces this list says "Producers SHOULD publish attestations in a number of places:", which I would interpret to mean that these all are SHOULDs, but if that's unclear we could repeat that for each item in the list.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps we should make it clear that they MUST publish provenance in at least one place and SHOULD publish it in many.

    signature for an artifact with the same filename (but different extension).
    This option requires the mapping between artifact and attestation (or
    attestation vessel) to be 1:1.

A combination of these options allows for a bootstrap process where projects
that want to generate build provenance attestations may begin publishing
attestations in a way that is directly tied to a source release or built
artifact without needing to wait for the upstream package repository to support
publishing attestations, by publishing it as part of the source repository
release.

Long-term, in order to maintain a single dependency on the package registry
already in use, repositories should gain support for both uploading and
distributing the build attestation alongside the artifact.

Short term, consumers of build artifacts can bootstrap a manual policy by using
the source repository only for projects that publish all artifacts and
attestations to the source repository, and later extend this to all artifacts
published to the package registry via the canonical installation tools once
a given ecosystem supports them.

## Immutability of attestations

> Attestations MUST be immutable. Once a build attestation is published as it

Reviewer 2: How does one enforce this? Does that mean that package repositories MUST use a transparent log or at least a [WORM](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/storage/protecting-data-with-amazon-s3-object-lock/) storage bucket?

Author: I think this is just one of many ways in which consumers need to trust artifact repositories, i.e. that their behavior ensures that attestations are immutable in the same way consumers assume artifacts are immutable.

# Distributing Artifacts

SLSA requires the distribution and verification of provenance metadata in the
form of SLSA attestations, in order to make provenance for related artifacts
available after generation for verification.

This document specifies how these attestations should be distributed, or the
relationship between build artifacts and attestations. It is primarily
concerned with artifacts for ecosystems that distribute "built distributions",
but some attention is also paid to ecosystems that distribute container images
or only distribute source artifacts, as many of the same principles generally
apply to any artifact or group of artifacts.

In addition, this document is primarily for the benefit of artifact
distributors, to understand how they should adopt the distribution of SLSA
provenance. It is primarily concerned with the means of distributing
attestations and the relationship of attestations to build artifacts, and not
with the specific format of the attestation or attestation bundle itself.

> ## Overview

Author: 89ff846

> ## Overview

Author: https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/commit/89ff846e7d0e98cd397e56b7c03b588dcd9bd643

In addition, this document is primarily for the benefit of artifact
distributors, to understand how they should adopt the distribution of SLSA
provenance. It is primarily concerned with the means of distributing
attestations and the relationship of attestations to build artifacts, and not
with the specific format of the attestation itself.

> 

Reviewer 4: Should the usual RFC 2119 boilerplate be included?

Author: 6d931c0

Other ecosystems are informal, such as a convention used within a company. Even
ad-hoc distribution of software, such as through a link on a website, is
considered an "ecosystem".

The package ecosystem's maintainers are responsible for reliably redistributing
artifacts and provenance, making the producers' expectations available to consumers,
and providing tools to enable safe artifact consumption (e.g. whether an artifact
meets its producer's expectations).

## Relationship between releases and attestations

For many ecosystems, a single "release" of a project, package, or library may
include multiple artifacts, resulting from because builds that may happen over
multiple differing platforms, architectures or environments, and may not happen
at roughly the same point in time (and might even span multiple days).

As a result, the complete set of all attestations for a given release may be
incomplete until a build is finished, and in reality, a build may never be
truly 'finished' as in many ecosystems, it is permissible for new artifacts
that support new platforms or architectures to be introduced for old releases

> long after the initial release.

Author: fa67fd4

As a result, using a single attestation bundle per release is unnecessarily
restrictive and does not work with the way complex, modern software artifacts

> are built and distributed.

Reviewer: Can we simplified this as, "Attestations should be bound to artifacts, not releases"?

## Relationship between artifacts and attestations

Package ecosystems SHOULD support a one-to-many relationship from build
artifacts to attestations to ensure that anyone is free to produce and publish
any attestation they may need. Package ecosystems MUST require a strict

> one-to-one relationship between from a build provenance attestation to a given

Reviewer 4: Nit: `between from a` should probably be `from a`.

Author: ```suggestion
one-to-one relationship from a build provenance attestation to a given
```

> relationship to the given artifacts.

Author: @kpk47, this is still unresolved, any thoughts about whether we need changes here?

> relationship to the given artifacts.

Reviewer 3: Maybe turn around the first sentence to use SHOULD?

> Package ecosystems SHOULD support multiple individual attestations or attestation bundles per release.

> relationship to the given artifacts.

Author: Already done in d1c2621b15a2f6f108ab67e52c53b803ab63e1ac!

## Relationship between artifacts and attestations

Given the previous recommendation that a single release may have multiple
attestations, this raises the question of the relationship between the
one-or-more artifacts that comprise the output of a release build and the

> attestations that correlate to them.

Reviewer 3: Maybe nix this sentence.

Author: 169ddf9

> It is recommended to support a one-to-many relationship between build artifacts
> and attestations, to ensure that anyone is free to produce and publish any
> attestation they may need, but require a strict one-to-one relationship between
> the build artifact and the build provenance attestation for that artifact. This

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Package ecosystems SHOULD support a one-to-many relationship between build artifacts
and attestations to ensure that anyone is free to produce and publish any
attestation they may need. Package ecosystems MUST require a strict one-to-one relationship between
the build artifact and the build provenance attestation for that artifact. 
```

> may require a custom filename schema that uniquely identifies the build
> attestation over other attestation types, or it may happen as a de-facto
> standard based on where the attestation is published.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The mappings can be either implicit (e.g. require a custom filename schema that uniquely identifies the build
attestation over other attestation types) or explicit (e.g. it may happen as a de-facto
standard based on where the attestation is published).
```

> For example, the build attestation should have a filename that is directly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The build attestation SHOULD have a filename that is directly
```

related to the build artifact filename. For example, for an artifact
`<filename>.<extension>`, the attestation is `<filename>.attestation` (or some
similar extension, for example [in-toto](https://in-toto.io/) recommends
`<filename>.intoto.jsonl`), or for an artifact with a SHA-256 hash of
`abc123...`, the attestation incorporates that hash into the filename or
metadata.

## Where attestations should be published

There are a number of opportunities and venues to publish attestations during

> and after the build process. It is recommended to publish attestations in a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and after the build process. Producers SHOULD publish attestations in a
```

> number of places:

Author: I think there isn't an order of preference: the recommendation is that they're published in all these places, if possible.

> -   **Publish attestations in a transparency log**: Once a build has been made,

Reviewer 3: IIUC, builds are processes and artifacts/packages are their outputs. Do you mean the publishing should happen at the end of the build process, once the artifact is build (but not necessarily at the end of the full build process), or something else?

Author: I don't think it matters, I think the recommendation is just "once you generate attestations, you should publish them". 

Should this be rephrased to "Once an attestation has been generated"?

Author: 2bef566

    the resulting attestation should be published to a third-party transparency

>     log that exists outside the source repository and artifact repository.

Author: I think 142eb4d addresses this -- it could be either or.

-   **Publish attestations alongside source releases in the source
    repository**: For ecosystems where source releases are commonly published
    to source repositories as well as to artifact repositories (such as GitHub

>     releases), if the source repository supports attaching additional artifacts
>     on a release, it is recommended to additionally include provenance
>     attestations as part of these releases. This option requires no changes to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    releases), producers SHOULD include provenance
    attestations as part of these releases if the source repository supports attaching additional artifacts
    to a release. This option requires no changes to
```

    the artifact repository to support build attestation formats, but means
    that the source repository in use is now in the dependency chain for
    installers that want to verify policy at build-time.
-   **Publish attestations alongside the artifact in the artifact repository**:
    Many software repositories already support some variety of publishing 1:1
    related files alongside an artifact, sometimes known as “sidecar files”.
    For example, PyPI supports publishing `.asc` files representing the PGP
    signature for an artifact with the same filename (but different extension).

>     This requires the mapping between artifact and attestation (or attestation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This option requires the mapping between artifact and attestation (or attestation
```

    vessel) to be 1:1.

A combination of these options allows for a bootstrap process where projects
that want to generate build provenance attestations may begin publishing
attestations in a way that is directly tied to a source release or built

> artifact without needing to wait, by publishing it as part of the source

Reviewer 3: What would producers be waiting for?

Author: a798577

repository release.

> Long-term, in order to maintain a single dependency on the artifact repository
> already in use, repositories should gain support for both uploading the build
> attestation format, and distributing it 1:1 alongside the artifact.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Long-term, in order to maintain a single dependency on the artifact repository
already in use, repositories should gain support for both uploading and distributing the build
attestation alongside the artifact.
```

Reviewer 3: We might also want to rework the sentence to avoid a lower case 'should'.

> Short term consumers of build artifacts can bootstrap a manual policy by using

Reviewer 3: Should I read this as "consumers who will use a package for a short while ..." or "while waiting for canonical tooling ..."?

Author: ee9c949

the source repository only for projects that publish all artifacts and
attestations to the source repository, and later extend this to all artifacts
published to the artifact repository via the canonical installation tools once
a given ecosystem supports them.

> ## Immutability of attestations

Reviewer: nit: attestation **bundle** throughout, right? In other words, a single artifact SHOULD be immutable, and once you attach an attestation bundle, that bundle SHOULD also be immutable.

> Attestations should be immutable. Once a build attestation is published as it

Reviewer 3: Maybe this should be MUST? Or are there ecosystems that can't support immutability?

Author: 72352ed

corresponds to a given artifact, that attestation is immutable and cannot be
overwritten later with a different attestation that refers to the same

> artifact. Instead, a new release (and new artifacts) should be created instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
artifact. Instead, a new release (and new artifacts) should be created.
```

Reviewer 3: When would someone need a new attestation to refer to an identical artifact?

Author: Possibly if: someone migrates to a new build system, does a reproducible build of the artifact, and has a new attestation for the same artifact. The original attestation should not be overwritable in this case.

## Format of the attestation

The provenance is available to the consumer in a format that the consumer
accepts. The format SHOULD be in-toto [SLSA Provenance](/provenance),
but another format MAY be used if both producer and consumer agree and it meets
all the other requirements.

## Considerations for source-based ecosystems

Some ecosystems have support for installing directly from source repositories
(optional for Python/`pip`, Go, etc). For these examples in these ecosystems,
as there is no "build" step that translates between a source repository and an
artifact that is being installed, there is no need to publish or verify build
provenance.

However, for ecosystems that install from source repositories _via_ some
intermediary (e.g. [Homebrew installing from GitHub release artifacts generated
from the repository or GitHub Packages](https://docs.brew.sh/Bottles), [Go

> installing through the Go module proxy](https://proxy.golang.org/), these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installing through the Go module proxy](https://proxy.golang.org/)), these
```

---
title: Distributing artifacts

> description: This page covers the detailed technical requirements for distributing artifacts at each SLSA level. The intended audience is system implementers and software distributors.

Reviewer 5: Should this page be called "Distributing provenance"? We don't offer requirements for other types of artifact.

Author: 4cb2965

prev_page:
  url: requirements
next_page:
  url: verifying-artifacts
---

SLSA requires the distribution and verification of provenance metadata in the
form of SLSA attestations, in order to make provenance for related artifacts

> available after generation for verification.

Author: 9e8bb46

This document provides specifications for distributing attestations, and the
relationship between build artifacts and attestations. It is primarily

> concerned with artifacts for ecosystems that distribute "built distributions",

Author: Yes, this is my Python slipping through. This should probably become "package" or "package artifact" per https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/terminology#package-model, thoughts?

one place, and SHOULD publish attestations in more than one place:

-   **Publish attestations in a transparency log**: Once an attestation has
    been generated for a build, the attestation (or a hash of the attestation
    and a pointer to where it is indexed) SHOULD be published to a third-party
    transparency log that exists outside the source repository and package
    registry. Not only are transparency logs guaranteed to be immutable, but
    they also more easily enable monitoring.  Requiring the presence of the
    attestation in a monitored transparency log during verification helps
    ensure the attestation is trustworthy.
-   **Publish attestations alongside source releases in the source
    repository**: For ecosystems where source releases are commonly published
    to source repositories as well as to package registries (such as GitHub
    releases), producers SHOULD include provenance as part of these releases if
    the source repository supports attaching additional artifacts to a release.
    This option requires no changes to the package registry to support
    provenance formats, but means that the source repository in use is now in

>     the critical path for installers that want to verify policy at build-time.

Author: Yes. Per https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/terminology this could just be "repository" but I think "source repository" makes it more clear. Maybe: "source platform"? I'm open to ideas.

>     the critical path for installers that want to verify policy at build-time.

Reviewer: I was also confused by this. Defining a new term might be a good idea. In our model GitHub is actually serving as a package registry where the package name _is_ the source repository name.

>     the critical path for installers that want to verify policy at build-time.

Reviewer: Maybe just avoid the confusion by saying "alongside the source repository releases"? Maybe:

> **Publish attestations alongside the source repository releases**: If the source repository hosting provider offers an artifact "release" feature, such as [GitHub releases](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/about-releases) or [GitLab releases](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/releases/), producers SHOULD include provenance as part of such releases. This option has the benefit of requiring no changes to the package registry to support provenance formats, but has the disadvantage of putting the source repository hosting providing in the critical path for installers that want to verify policy at build-time.

>     the critical path for installers that want to verify policy at build-time.

Reviewer 5: That avoids the confusion and avoids defining a new term. WFM!

>     the critical path for installers that want to verify policy at build-time.

Author: f8eddce

overwritten later with a different attestation that refers to the same
artifact. Instead, a new release (and new artifacts) MUST be created.

## Format of the attestation

The provenance is available to the consumer in a format that the consumer
accepts. The format SHOULD be in-toto [SLSA Provenance](/provenance), but
another format MAY be used if both producer and consumer agree and it meets all
the other requirements.

## Considerations for source-based ecosystems

Some ecosystems have support for installing directly from source repositories
(an option for Python/`pip`, Go, etc). In these cases, there is no need to
publish or verify provenance because there is no "build" step that translates
between a source repository and an artifact that is being installed.

However, for ecosystems that install from source repositories _via_ some
intermediary (e.g. [Homebrew installing from GitHub release artifacts generated
from the repository or GitHub Packages](https://docs.brew.sh/Bottles), [Go
installing through the Go module proxy](https://proxy.golang.org/)), these
ecosystems distribute "source archives" that are not the bit-for-bit identical

> form from version control.  These intermediaries as transforming the original

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
form from version control.  These intermediaries are transforming the original
```
?

---
title: Distributing artifacts
description: This page covers the detailed technical requirements for distributing artifacts at each SLSA level. The intended audience is system implementers and software distributors.
prev_page:
  url: requirements
next_page:
  url: verifying-artifacts
---

> In order to make provenance for related artifacts available after generation

Reviewer 6: nit: 'related' feels redundant.
```suggestion
In order to make provenance for artifacts available after generation
```

Attestations SHOULD be bound to artifacts, not releases.

A single "release" of a project, package, or library might include multiple
artifacts. These artifacts result from builds on different platforms,
architectures or environments. The builds need not happen at roughly the same
point in time and might even span multiple days.

The set of attestations for a given release is incomplete until all
builds for a given release are finished. However, it is difficult or impossible
to determine when a release is 'finished' because many ecosystems allow adding
new artifacts to old releases when adding support for new platforms or
architectures.

Thus, package ecosystems SHOULD support multiple individual attestations per
release. At the time of a given build, the relevant provenance for that build
can be added to the release, depending on the relationship to the given
artifacts.

## Relationship between artifacts and attestations

Package ecosystems SHOULD support a one-to-many relationship from build
artifacts to attestations to ensure that anyone is free to produce and publish
any attestation they might need. Package ecosystems MUST provide a way to map a

> given artifact to corresponding provenance. The mappings can be either implicit

Reviewer 6: nit: trying to use consistent language.
```suggestion
given artifact to its corresponding attestation. The mappings can be either implicit
```

(e.g. require a custom filename schema that uniquely identifies the provenance
over other attestation types) or explicit (e.g. it could happen as a de-facto
standard based on where the attestation is published).

The provenance SHOULD have a filename that is directly related to the build
artifact filename. For example, for an artifact `<filename>.<extension>`, the
attestation is `<filename>.attestation` or some similar extension (for example
[in-toto](https://in-toto.io/) recommends `<filename>.intoto.jsonl`.)

## Where attestations are published

There are a number of opportunities and venues to publish attestations during
and after the build process. Producers MUST publish attestations in at least
one place, and SHOULD publish attestations in more than one place:

> -   **Publish attestations in a transparency log**: Once an attestation has

Reviewer 7: I don't think Rekor aims at being a distribution service per se. It's intended to be an append-only log, but there's no intention for Rekor to be used for discovery. That's why SIgstore bundles were created, ie to avoid the need to hit the log to discover the attestation.

I agree it's good to have attestations recorded in an immutable log. What's unclear is that we say `Producers MUST publish attestations in at least one place`, but if this only place is Rekor then verifiers will hit the log for discovery and use a hash of the artifact as index? This leads to attacks where someone DoSes the verifier by uploading many entries for a good artifact.

It's also a little unclear what "attestation" means. The signed attestation (payload + DSSE) or just the raw intoto provenance attestation?

/cc @asraa @bobcallaway @haydentherapper

Reviewer 6: It does seem that sigstore-js already does include a full sigstore bundle in the tlog entry which would include the dsse envelope and the full attestation payload. So I wonder if there was some discussion and consensus that was built prior to this.

https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-js/blob/2484d689d9c6f54c0a65c80a9acac771ae5d7ed9/src/tlog/format.ts#L74-L118

/cc @bdehamer

Reviewer 8: Agreed @laurentsimon, Rekor is meant to only record what it has been presented and not be storage. Logs ideally should be treated as untrusted, and everything is verifiable - inclusion of an entry, consistency of the log, etc. Trusting Rekor to provide the attestation is antithetical to the purpose of the log.

Reviewer 9: @ianlewis to clarify what's going on there

> It does seem that sigstore-js already does include a full sigstore bundle in the tlog entry which would include the dsse envelope and the full attestation payload. So I wonder if there was some discussion and consensus that was built prior to this.

When you send an intoto type to rekor, you add the dsse envelope including the full attestation payload. The intoto type recorded on the log does NOT include the full attestation payload, but rather a hash commit to it. A separate GCS bucket on Rekor currently stores a attestation payloads up to a configured side, but they are not on the immutable log (they are returned if available when querying the log). Check out the raw body of this [attestation](https://search.sigstore.dev/?logIndex=16138354)

It's not obvious but there is a difference in the proposed entry you send to Rekor and the committed entry to the log.

Author: What I'm taking from this discussion is that this should only recommend the "hash of an attestation and a pointer to where it is indexed" option. How about:

> -   **Publish attestations in a transparency log**: Once an attestation has
>     been generated for a build, a hash of the attestation and a pointer to
>     where it is indexed SHOULD be published to a third-party transparency log
>     that exists outside the source repository and package registry. Not only
>     are transparency logs guaranteed to be immutable, but they also more easily
>     enable monitoring.  Requiring the presence of the attestation in a
>     monitored transparency log during verification helps ensure the attestation
>     is trustworthy.

Reviewer 6: I think it should also be clear when we say:

> Producers MUST publish attestations in at least one place, and SHOULD publish attestations in more than one place:

that publishing a hash, or even the full attestation to the tlog only would not satisfy the MUST part of this statement. Right now it seems like a tlog is just one of the possible places to publish.

Author: Thanks y'all, makes sense. Addressed in edb21fc.

---
title: Distributing artifacts
description: This page covers the detailed technical requirements for distributing artifacts at each SLSA level. The intended audience is system implementers and software distributors.
prev_page:
  url: requirements
next_page:

>   url: verifying-artifacts

Reviewer: These can now be removed as of a few minutes ago (#724). Same for the other files. (If you sync you'll get merge conflicts. The right resolution is to remove.)

provenance. It is primarily concerned with the means of distributing
attestations and the relationship of attestations to build artifacts, and not
with the specific format of the attestation itself.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119).

## Background

The [package ecosystem](terminology.md#package-model)'s maintainers are
responsible for reliably redistributing artifacts and provenance, making the
producers' expectations available to consumers, and providing tools to enable
safe artifact consumption (e.g. whether an artifact meets its producer's
expectations).

## Relationship between releases and attestations

Attestations SHOULD be bound to artifacts, not releases.

A single "release" of a project, package, or library might include multiple
artifacts. These artifacts result from builds on different platforms,
architectures or environments. The builds need not happen at roughly the same
point in time and might even span multiple days.

> The complete set of attestations for a given release is incomplete until all

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The set of attestations for a given release is incomplete until all
```

> builds for a given release are finished. However, it is difficult or impossible

Reviewer 10: This seems to imply that a given *build's* attestation is finished as soon as the build completes. I think that's insufficiently flexible: if we have reproducible builds and want attestations from two different builders, those would happen at different times. For dynamic information (like known vulnerabilities in an old package), you might even want new attestations years in the future, from a recurring scan.

Maybe the key thing here (see also the section on immutability) is that new attestations (and builds) can always be added to a release, but never removed.

Author: > This seems to imply that a given build's attestation is finished as soon as the build completes. I think that's insufficiently flexible: if we have reproducible builds and want attestations from two different builders, those would happen at different times. For dynamic information (like known vulnerabilities in an old package), you might even want new attestations years in the future, from a recurring scan.

I think the provenance for a given artifact (the "build attestation") shouldn't be published until the reproducible builders have finished and provided individual attestations which should be combined.

> Maybe the key thing here (see also the section on immutability) is that new attestations (and builds) can always be added to a release, but never removed.

Yes, exactly. Do you think this needs additional clarification, or does the immutability section cover it?

Reviewer 10: > I think the provenance for a given artifact (the "build attestation") shouldn't be published until the reproducible builders have finished and provided individual attestations which should be combined.

Who's responsible for combining them? I generally prefer a model where they remain separate and then the verification policy requires >1 individual attestation, retrieved from whatever source. We don't have to go into that detail in this doc but I'd prefer to leave that model possible based on what's here.
 
My vote would be to make a change like:

> The set of attestations for a given release is incomplete until all builds for a given release are finished.

to

> The set of attestations for a given release may grow (but never shrink) over time as additional builds and attestations are created.

If you have a strong preference for something closer to what exists, I can live with that, though 🙂 

> Yes, exactly. Do you think this needs additional clarification, or does the immutability section cover it?

I wouldn't mind some foreshadowing here, though it may not be strictly necessary. Your call.

Author: 7ad4d3a, which also includes changes from the rest of our discussion.

I dropped "but never shrink" because I think deleting artifacts (for ecosystems that support it) could/should result in attestations being deleted as well.

to determine when a release is 'finished' because many ecosystems allow adding
new artifacts to old releases when adding support for new platforms or
architectures.

Thus, package ecosystems SHOULD support multiple individual attestations per

> release. At the time of a given build, the relevant build attestations for that

Reviewer 10: Build attestation is never defined. I think that's worth a quick sentence or two (or a link to the terminology page)

Author: I think "provenance" is a better term for this (that's conveniently already defined): 559e22d

build can be added to the release, depending on the relationship to the given
artifacts.

## Relationship between artifacts and attestations

Package ecosystems SHOULD support a one-to-many relationship from build
artifacts to attestations to ensure that anyone is free to produce and publish
any attestation they might need. Package ecosystems MUST provide a way to map a

> given artifact to a build attestation. The mappings can be either implicit

Reviewer 10: Nit: "a build attestation" -> "corresponding build attestations" or something?

I can imagine requiring >1 canonical build attestation (e.g., if builds are reproducible).

Author: a78555c

(e.g. require a custom filename schema that uniquely identifies the build
attestation over other attestation types) or explicit (e.g. it could happen as
a de-facto standard based on where the attestation is published).

> The build attestation SHOULD have a filename that is directly related to the

Reviewer 10: What if there's more than one? Do we smush all attestations into the same file?

Reviewer 11: [Here](https://github.com/micronaut-projects/micronaut-core/releases/tag/v4.0.0-M1) is one example project that produces 30+ artifacts. We had to create an archive file and use `multiple.intoto.jsonl` to attest to the artifacts.

Author: > What if there's more than one? Do we smush all attestations into the same file?

* If there's more than one artifact (`a.zip`, `b.zip`) there should be more than one attestation (`a.intoto.jsonl`, `b.intoto.jsonl`)
* If theres one artifact (`a.zip`) but more than one provenance attestation (e.g. multiple reproducible builds with the same result) these should be in the same file (`a.intoto.jsonl`).

If that makes sense, I can make an update here to make that more clear.

> [Here](https://github.com/micronaut-projects/micronaut-core/releases/tag/v4.0.0-M1) is one example project that produces 30+ artifacts. We had to create an archive file and use multiple.intoto.jsonl to attest to the artifacts.

I would argue that in this case, `artifacts.zip` is the actual artifact, and `multiple.intoto.jsonl` is the attestation for that artifact, not the files within that artifact (which seems to be the case, as it contains a single attestation). The only difference is that `multiple` seems arbitrary, and that the filename should be something like `artifacts.intoto.jsonl`, or some other convention that the ecosystem has determined.

Reviewer 11: > I would argue that in this case, artifacts.zip is the actual artifact, and multiple.intoto.jsonl is the attestation for that artifact, not the files within that artifact (which seems to be the case, as it contains a single attestation)

The `artifacts.zip` was created to avoid cluttering the release assets. The `multiple.intoto.jsonl` still attests to every subject included in  `artifacts.zip`  individually. We still want to keep a separate subject for every JAR artifact in the provenance, hence using `multiple.intoto.jsonl`.

It's common for a Java project to have multiple sub-projects and produce several JAR files as release artifacts, so we need a practical solution here. 

@laurentsimon @ianlewis any thoughts?

Reviewer: As I understand it, the main requirement is that there is a well-defined API for retrieving the attestations for a particular artifact. Maybe that's not coming across clearly in the text, leading to confusion?

For example, suppose the ecosystem has an API where you fetch `<package>/<version>/<filename>`, e.g. `micronaut-aop/4.0.0-M1/micronaut-aop-4.0.0-M1-javadoc.jar`. There SHOULD (MUST?) be a well-known transform from that path to a corresponding `.intoto.jsonl` file, say `micronaut-aop/4.0.0-M1/micronaut-aop-4.0.0-M1-javadoc.jar.intoto.jsonl`. If a particular release has a one-to-may relationship between attestation bundles and artifacts (as in the link from @behnazh-w), then the recommendation is to make copies or links so that the API continues to work. The alternative of requiring multiple artifacts (`<package>/<version>/*`) to _always_ have a single bundle (`<package>/<version>/multiple.intoto.jsonl`) would likely no work since it would preclude cases where each artifact has a separate bundle.

Does that help?

Reviewer 6: I agree that the goal is for there to be a well known way to get the attestation given the location of the artifact. Ideally this is consistent throughout the ecosystem.

Ideally also it has a similar naming scheme so it's obvious to humans what attestations go with what artifacts.

Reviewer 11: Thanks @MarkLodato . I agree that we need a very clear API. 

>The alternative of requiring multiple artifacts (<package>/<version>/*) to always have a single bundle (<package>/<version>/multiple.intoto.jsonl) would likely no work since it would preclude cases where each artifact has a separate bundle.

We don't need to recommend it in this way only. We can recommend two ways at least for the Java ecosystem:

1. allow multiple subjects being attested in a single attestation bundle by using `<group>/<version>.intoto.jsonl` (better than `multiple.intoto.jsonl` for sure). 
2. allow `<group>/<version>/<filename>.intoto.jsonl` for single artifacts in case that's preferred for a project. 

The recommendation for GitHub releases can be: artifacts can be published as individual files, or in an archive file that can be unpacked by a verifier. That greatly helps projects that have many artifacts. 

I predict that this is very soon going to be even more important as we start seeing SBOMs and other byproducts of a pipeline being attested by a SLSA provenance. Considering the way [slsa-github-generator](https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa-github-generator) works, if we want to mandate "attestation SHOULD have a filename that is directly related to", we would need to call the reusable workflow each time, which will make release pipelines very slow. So an attatation bundle with multiple subjects should be definitely allowed.

>I'm also curious what happens with artifacts.zip and multiple.intoto.jsonl when it's published to the package registry: is it published as-is? Or is it broken apart into separate artifacts?

@di Right now we are using GitHub releases and creating `artifacts.zip` to publish the attestations next to the artifacts. But at the same time each of the artifacts included in `artifacts.zip` are separately published to Maven central, e.g., see [here](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/micronaut/micronaut-aop/4.0.0-M1/). Once Maven and Gradle support publishing SLSA provenances, i.e.,  there will be a `multiple.intoto.jsonl` (or `<group>/<version>.intoto.jsonl`) to query from [Maven central](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/micronaut/micronaut-aop/4.0.0-M1/) as well. Here the `multiple.intoto.jsonl` would have a one-to-many relationship but it could actually be beneficial to know what other artifacts were built by the same pipeline.

Note that right now we can manually verify the individual artifacts like below, but that's because I know the query URL in Maven central for the subjects in the generated provenance. Otherwise tools like [macaron](https://github.com/oracle-samples/macaron) can't establish this connection, hence the need for `artifacts.zip` in the GitHub release.
```bash
$curl --output micronaut-aop-4.0.0-M1-javadoc.jar -L https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/micronaut/micronaut-aop/4.0.0-M1/micronaut-aop-4.0.0-M1-javadoc.jar

$slsa-verifier verify-artifact micronaut-aop-4.0.0-M1-javadoc.jar --provenance-path multiple.intoto.jsonl --source-uri github.com/micronaut-projects/micronaut-core
```

Reviewer 4: Speaking about attestations retrieved from the package repository (as opposed to the source repository), I think it's important to keep in mind that a goal is to _not_ require an API to find that file's URL. It should be derivable from the name of the package in a predictable way.

Doing so makes it CDN-friendly, which is a huge deal for package repos. Without Fastly, services like RubyGems.org and PyPI would probably buckle in seconds.

Reviewer 12: It's not clear to me the details need to be hashed out in the specification vs. it being more of a tooling discussion?

In some of the other working groups, like the securing software repos wg, there appeared to be some reluctance on being too prescriptive as far as an api goes.

Reviewer 12: Yeah I think API is the wrong term here. Also, there appeared to be some reluctance from other working groups, like the securing software repos wg, to be too prescriptive on how folks should distribute and consume SLSA attestations. Looking at the wording in the distributing-artifacts.md though it does seem pretty flexible. Is there any concern it's not clear enough?

Author: > or in an archive file that can be unpacked by a verifier

I'd be concerned that this pattern would be adding an extra transformative step that lacks verification -- I think verification should be just "artifact" + "attestations" with no transformation necessary.

Reviewer 11: > I'd be concerned that this pattern would be adding an extra transformative step that lacks verification -- I think verification should be just "artifact" + "attestations" with no transformation necessary.

Fair enough. It might be a good idea to keep the recommendation at "artifact" + "attestations" level. 

>Also, there appeared to be some reluctance from other working groups, like the securing software repos wg, to be too prescriptive on how folks should distribute and consume SLSA attestations.

Agreed. Because attestations allow multiple subjects (one-to-many relationship to artifacts), in practice we can't be prescriptive and require "The build attestation SHOULD have a filename that is directly related to the build artifact filename". Otherwise, we should just allow a one-to-one relationship between an attestation bundle and artifact to begin with.

Reviewer 11: @di Just to answer the question:
>I'm not sure if I follow: there's nothing here preventing an ecosystem from providing the exact same attestation as different filenames (even if it contains multiple subjects). Why do attestations with multiple subjects prevent us from being prescriptive here?

Thanks for the clarification. So you're saying we should copy the same attestation bundle under different names for every subject included. That would be doable when package repositories like Maven central start hosting the attestations, but until then it won't be practical for GitHub releases when a project has 30+ artifacts.

Let's continue the discussion in a follow-up PR :+1:

    ensure the attestation is trustworthy.
-   **Publish attestations alongside source releases in the source
    repository**: For ecosystems where source releases are commonly published
    to source repositories as well as to package registries (such as GitHub
    releases), producers SHOULD include provenance attestations as part of
    these releases if the source repository supports attaching additional
    artifacts to a release. This option requires no changes to the package
    registry to support build attestation formats, but means that the source
    repository in use is now in the critical path for installers that want
    to verify policy at build-time.
-   **Publish attestations alongside the artifact in the package registry**:
    Many software repositories already support some variety of publishing 1:1
    related files alongside an artifact, sometimes known as “sidecar files”.
    For example, PyPI supports publishing `.asc` files representing the PGP
    signature for an artifact with the same filename (but different extension).
    This option requires the mapping between artifact and attestation (or
    attestation vessel) to be 1:1.

> A combination of these options allows for a bootstrap process where projects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A combination of these options allows for a bootstraping process where projects
```

that want to generate build provenance attestations can begin publishing
attestations in a way that is directly tied to a source release or built
artifact without needing to wait for the upstream package registry to support
publishing attestations, by publishing it as part of the source repository

> release.

Reviewer 3: I'm having trouble parsing this sentence. 

Are you saying that publishing provenance to the source repo is a stepping stone to publishing provenance to the pkg repo? How does publishing build provenance to a source repo help in cases where the build isn't reproducible?

Reviewer 10: If I'm reading correctly, the point here is that you could start building a totally third-party system for verifying build provenance without needing the repository itself to implement anything.

I think the confusion is that a "release" on the source repository can actually be a *built* release. So you have GitHub Actions do the build and sign an attestation when it creates a GitHub release. This is exactly the same as the attestation that *would* be published to the package repository, once the package repository supports it.

Author: Yes, what @znewman01 said, and additionally:

- starting to publish attestations to a source repository gets the project 90% of the way there to publishing them in a package repository once it is supported
- a package repository that doesn't support publishing attestations might still support some verifiable link between the package and the source repository, which allows the attestations to be discovered there.

Reviewer 3: Got it. So if I understand correctly, then the bootstrapping process is
1. generate provenance with your CI/CD system
2. publish provenance to the source repo
3. when possible, publish provenance to the pkg repo.

Can we make these steps more explicit? Maybe something like
> Combining these options gives us a process for bootstrapping SLSA adoption within an ecosystem, even if
> the package registry doesn't support publishing attestations. First, interested projects modify their release 
> process to produce SLSA provenance. Then, they publish that provenance to their source repository.
> Finally, they publish the provenance to the package registry, if and when the registry supports it.

Author: c731b0e

Long-term, package registries SHOULD support uploading and distributing
build attestations alongside the artifact. This model is preferred
for two reasons:

-   trust: clients already trust the package registry as the source of their
    artifacts, and don't need to trust an additional service;
-   reliability: clients already depend on the package registry as part of
    their critical path, so distributing provenance via the registry avoids
    adding an additional point of failure.

Short term, consumers of build artifacts can bootstrap a manual policy by using
the source repository only for projects that publish all artifacts and
attestations to the source repository, and later extend this to all artifacts
published to the package registry via the canonical installation tools once
a given ecosystem supports them.

## Immutability of attestations

Attestations MUST be immutable. Once a build attestation is published as it
corresponds to a given artifact, that attestation is immutable and cannot be

> overwritten later with a different attestation that refers to the same

Reviewer 10: We can add new attestations, though–right?

Author: Yes.

artifact. Instead, a new release (and new artifacts) MUST be created.

## Format of the attestation

The provenance is available to the consumer in a format that the consumer
accepts. The format SHOULD be in-toto [SLSA Provenance](/provenance), but
another format MAY be used if both producer and consumer agree and it meets all
the other requirements.

## Considerations for source-based ecosystems

Some ecosystems have support for installing directly from source repositories
(an option for Python/`pip`, Go, etc). In these cases, there is no need to

> publish or verify provenance because there is no "build" step that translates

Reviewer 10: SLSA almost always uses the term provenance to mean "build provenance" but I think that's in conflict with the common usage.

The source still has some notion of "provenance" (where'd it come from? is a given tag supposed to indicate a release? was this commit merged by a real maintainer). I can imagine wanting to check this (though it's explicitly out-of-scope for SLSA). This information could come from VCS/forge mechanisms for signing/auth, but I could imagine a proper provenance attestation being useful too.

I'd suggest "In these cases, there is no need to publish or verify *build* provenance." You could (but don't need to) say something about source provenance, noting that it's out-of-scope, as well.

Author: I think that given that we explicitly define "provenance" as "attestations about how build artifacts were created", I'll stick with that interpretation here as implied, and will save discussions about source for the future "source" track.

Reviewer 10: Fair enough!

-   **Publish attestations in a transparency log**: Once a build has been made,
    the resulting attestation (or a hash of the attestation and a pointer to
    where it is indexed) SHOULD be published to a third-party transparency log
    that exists outside the source repository and package registry. Not only
    are transparency logs are guaranteed to be immutable, but they also more
    easily enable monitoring.  Requiring the presence of the attestation in a
    monitored transparency log during verification helps ensure the attestation

>     is trustworthy.

Author: I'm weighing how technical we want to get about explaining transparency logs here vs. just linking to something like https://docs.sigstore.dev/security/#rekor-security-model or https://transparency.dev/. What would you suggest?

>     is trustworthy.

Author: I think there's not much distinction here between distributing a provenance file, or distributing a reference to that provenance file -- either way, we're including it in the transparency log.

That said, if the attestation is signed and the signature is added to the transparency log instead, I don't see that this would provide any added benefit -- and since that is more about the provenance format, I think I agree that we can remove this here.

If we do that, do you think that it would make sense for https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/verifying-artifacts  to declare a preference for signing methodologies that rely on transparency logs?

(Also, just found some prior discussion about this here: https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/issues/235#issuecomment-1013800183)

>     is trustworthy.

Reviewer: > If we do that, do you think that it would make sense for https://slsa.dev/spec/v1.0/verifying-artifacts to declare a preference for signing methodologies that rely on transparency logs?

Yeah, that sounds like a good idea.

>     is trustworthy.

Author: https://github.com/slsa-framework/slsa/issues/727
